---
layout: post
title: "Week 0: On your mark..."
date: 2015-02-01
categories: coding
---

I don't think I ever really considered the idea of becoming a blogger until recently. As I approach the end of my undergraduate career, I realize that it is prime time for me to start putting some effort into putting myself out there. First, a little background information: I'm currently a senior Computer Science major at SUNY Potsdam, in warm, sunny Potsdam, NY. I've been interested in science and technology since before I can remember, though I strangely did not consider becoming a programmer until a few months before my freshman year of college. Once I did make the decision, I started by reading as much literature as I could. Starting with online tutorials and expanding outward, I eventually started giving myself assignments in C++, which hearsay claimed to be a good starting point for the budding amateur. Now, after almost four years of academic learning, I've become deeply knowledgeable about a select few languages, namely Python, Java, and, of course, C++. However, as is frequently expressed in the field, it is good practice to have a deep understand of a few languages and a broad understanding of numerous others. So, then, here I am, about to plunge headfirst into my first sprint.

For my first language, I wanted to strike out into the deep end. Having only a very shallow understanding of functional programming standards, it seems to me that Haskell is the best fit for prototyping this one-week plan. Before I begin learning and documenting my experiences, it seems like a good idea to talk about my familiarity with the language at hand. Lucky for my writing hand, I have next to no knowledge of Haskell! In fact, I have heard of it only within literature from SUNY Potsdam's campus library and the proselytizing of one of my peers in the Computer Science department. From this, I know that Haskell is well-liked among functional programming languages, but not much else.

With all that said, welcome to Code Marathon and thanks for reading! Let's get started.
